Attacks on Cryptosystems
Historically, attempts to gain unauthorized access to secure communications have used brute force attacks, in which the ciphertext is repeatedly searched for clues that can lead to the algorithm's structure. These ciphertext attacks involve a hacker searching for a common text structure, wording, or syntax in the encrypted message that can enable him or her to calculate the number of each type of letter used in the message. This process, known as frequency analysis, is used along with published frequency of occurrence patterns of various languages and can allow an experienced attacker to crack almost any code quickly with a large enough sample of the encoded text. To protect against this, modern algorithms attempt to remove the repetitive and predictable sequences of characters from the ciphertext.

Occasionally, an attacker may obtain duplicate texts, one in ciphertext and one in plaintext, and thus reverse-engineer the encryption algorithm in a known-plaintext attack scheme. Alter- natively, attackers may conduct a selected-plaintext attack by sending potential victims a specific text that they are sure the victims will forward on to others. When the victim does encrypt and forward the message, it can be used in the attack if the attacker can acquire the outgoing encrypted version. At the very least, reverse engineering can usually lead the attacker to discover which cryptosystem is being employed.

Most publicly available encryption methods are generally released to the information and computer security communities to test the encryption algorithm's resistance to cracking. In addition, attackers are kept informed of which methods of attack have failed. Although the purpose of sharing this information is to develop a more secure algorithm, it does prevent attackers from wasting their time, freeing them up to find new weaknesses in the cryptosystem or new, more challenging means of obtaining encryption keys.

In general, attacks on cryptosystems fall into four general categories: man-in-the-middle, correlation, dictionary, and timing. Although you learned about several of these attacks in Chapter 2, they are discussed here to evaluate their impact on cryptosystems.


Man-in-the-Middle Attack
A man-in-the-middle attack, as you learned in Chapter 2, attempts to intercept a public key or even to insert a known key structure in place of the requested public key. Thus, attackers attempt to place themselves between the sender and receiver, and once they've intercepted the request for key exchanges, they send each participant a valid public key, which is known only to them. To the victims of such attacks, encrypted communication appears to be occur- ring normally, but in fact the attacker is receiving each encrypted message and decoding it (with the key given to the sending party), and then encrypting and sending it to the intended recipient. Establishing public keys with digital signatures can prevent the traditional man- in-the-middle attack, as the attacker cannot dup﻿

Correlation Attacks
As the complexities of encryption methods have increased, so too have the tools and methods of cryptanalysts. Correlation attacks are a collection of brute-force methods that attempt to deduce statistical relationships between the structure of the unknown key and the ciphertext generated by the cryptosystem. Differential and linear cryptanalysis, which are advanced methods of code breaking that are beyond the scope of this text, have been used to mount successful attacks on block cipher encryptions such as DES. If these advanced approaches can calculate the value of the public key in a reasonable time, all messages written with that key can be decrypted. The only defense against this attack is the selection of strong cryptosystems that have stood the test of time, thorough key management, and strict adherence to the best practices of cryptography in the frequency of key changes.

Dictionary Attacks
In a dictionary attack, the attacker encrypts every word in a dictionary using the same cryptosystem as used by the target in an attempt to locate a match between the target ciphertext and the list of encrypted words. Dictionary attacks can be successful when the ciphertext consists of relatively few characters, as for example files which contain encrypted usernames and passwords. An attacker who acquires a system password file can run hundreds of thou- sands of potential passwords from the dictionary he or she has prepared against the stolen list. Most computer systems use a well-known one-way hash function to store passwords in such files, but an attacker can almost always find at least a few matches in any stolen password file. After a match is found, the attacker has essentially identified a potential valid pass- word for the system.

Timing Attacks
In a timing attack, the attacker eavesdrops on the victim's session and uses statistical analysis of patterns and inter-keystroke timings to discern sensitive session information. While timing analysis may not directly result in the decryption of sensitive data, it can be used to gain information about the encryption key and perhaps the cryptosystem. It may also eliminate some algorithms, thus narrowing the attacker's search and increasing the odds of eventual success. Having broken an encryption, the attacker may launch a replay attack, which is an attempt to resubmit a recording of the deciphered authentication to gain entry into a secure source.

Defending Against Attacks
Encryption is a very useful tool in protecting the confidentiality of information that is in storage or transmission. However, it is just that-another tool in the information security administrator's arsenal against threats to information security. Frequently, the uninformed describe information security exclusively in terms of encryption (and possibly firewalls and antivirus software). But encryption is simply the process of hiding the true meaning of information. Over millennia, mankind has developed dramatically more sophisticated means of hiding information from those who should not see it, but no matter how sophisticated encryption and cryptosystems have become, they retain the flaw that was present in the very first such system: If you discover the key, that is, the method used to perform the encryption, you can read the message. Thus, key management is not so much the management of technology but rather the management of people.

Encryption can, however, protect information when it is most vulnerable—that is, when it is outside the organization’s systems. Information in transit through public or leased networks is outside the organization’s control, and with loss of control can come loss of security. Encryption helps organizations secure information that must travel through public and leased networks by guarding the information against the efforts of those who sniff, spoof, and otherwise skulk around. As such, encryption is a vital piece of the security puzzle.

